 # Implementation of JWT token authentication in the TEAVS system

## Overview
JSON Web Tokens ensure secure, stateless authentication for all users in the TEAVS system. On a successful login, the system issues a jwt token that is signed using HMAC SHA-256 signing algorithm. In the system, the JWT token serves two purposes: Authentication and Authorisation.
This implementation priortises password security, and ensures that any attempt to gain unauthorised access will result in an error by utilizing signature verification and 15-30 minutes token lifetime expiration.  
 
## Technical Implementation of JWT
This system implements the python library `PyJWT` 
```python
import jwt
import datetime

SECRET_KEY = "A secret"
ALGORITHM = "HS256"

def generate_jwt(user_id,role):
    # Define Payload
    payload = {
        "iss" : "TEAVS-System",
        "iat" : datetime.datetime.utcnow(),
        "exp" : datetime.datetime.utcnow() + datetime.timedelta(minutes=30),
        "userID" : user_id,
        "role" : role
    }

    # Generate Token
    token = jwt.encode(payload, SECRET_KEY, algorithms = [ALGORITHM])
    return token

def verify_jwt(token):
    try: 
        # Verify Signature and Expiration
        decoded_payload = jwt.decode (token, SECRET_KEY, algorithms =  [ALGORITHM])
        return decoded_payload
    except jwt.ExpiredSignatureError:
        return "Error: Token has expired"
    except jwt.InvalidTokenError:
        return "Error: Invalid Token"

```

Example of how token generation, verification will work in main:
``` python
# A successful login by an admin
token = generate_jwt(user_id = "user123", role = "admin")
print (f"Generated JWT: {token}")

# API request verification
print(f"Verified Payload: {verify_jwt(token)}")

```

## Implementation Logic 
- The secret key that is used to sign the JSON Web Token is stored in an environment variable in the Backend.
- On a successful login, the `generate_jwt` function is called. 
The jwt token generated by the Backend contains the header (token type, and algorithm), payload (packaging the `userId` and `role`), and the signature. 
The function returns this string (token) to the Frontend. 
- For every following API request, Backend verifies the JWT token using the`secret key` instead of checking the database. If the signature is valid, and the token has not yet expired, the user is authenticated. This is how stateless authentication is implemented in the system.
- Following the RBAC model, the system verifies the jwt token using the secret key and after `jwt.decode()`, the system checks `decoded_payload['role']`. If the user is trying to access out-of-bound endpoint, the system returns a `403 Forbidden` error. 

## Security Benefits 
- Stateless Authentication: The system does not store "sessions" in the database, it just verifies the token for every API request.
- Integrity : Altering claims in the token, such as changing the `role` from user to admin would result in an `InvalidTokenError` during verification, since the token is signed using HS256.
- Limited Token Lifetime : If the tokens are stolen, the amount of possible damage is very minimal, because tokens are short-lived.